0x05h - Enhance Android Deep Link Testing (by @NowSecure) (#2090)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05h-Testing-Platform-Interaction.md

### Overview

Android apps can expose functionality through deep links (which are a part of Intents). They can expose functionality to

> - other apps (via IPC mechanisms, such as Intents, Binders, Android Shared Memory (ASHMEM), or BroadcastReceivers),

Author: ```suggestion
- other apps (via deep links or other IPC mechanisms, such as Intents or BroadcastReceivers).
```

A convenient way to dynamically test deep linking is to use Frida or frida-trace and hook the `shouldOverrideUrlLoading`, `shouldInterceptRequest` methods while using the app and clicking on links within the WebView. Be sure to also hook other related [`Uri`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/net/Uri "Uri class") methods such as `getHost`, `getScheme` or `getPath` which are typically used to inspect the requests and match known patterns or deny lists.

## Testing Deep Links (MSTG-PLATFORM-3)

### Overview

*Deep links* are URIs of any scheme that take users directly to specific content in an app. An app can [set up deep links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking) by adding _intent filters_ on the Android Manifest and extracting data from incoming intents to navigate users to the correct activity.

Android supports two types of deep links:

> - **Custom URL Scheme**: deep links that use any custom URL scheme, e.g. `myapp://` (not verified by the OS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Custom URL Scheme** which are deep links that use any custom URL scheme, e.g. `myapp://` (not verified by the OS).
```

> - **Android App Links** (Android 6.0 (API level 23) and higher): deep links that use the `http://` and `https://` schemes and contain the `autoVerify` attribute (which triggers OS verification).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Android App Links** (Android 6.0 (API level 23) and higher), which are deep links that use the `http://` and `https://` schemes and contain the `autoVerify` attribute (which triggers OS verification).
```

- App Links require a live domain to serve a [Digital Asset Links file](https://developers.google.com/digital-asset-links/v1/getting-started "Digital Asset Link") via HTTPS.
- App Links do not suffer from deep link collision since they don't show a disambiguation dialog when a user opens them.

#### Testing Deep Links

Any existing deep links (including App Links) can potentially increase the app attack surface. This [includes many risks](https://people.cs.vt.edu/gangwang/deep17.pdf) such as link hijacking, sensitive functionality exposure, etc. The Android version in which the app runs also influences the risk:

- Before Android 12 (API level 31), if the app has any [non-verifiable links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#fix-errors), it can cause the system to not verify all Android App Links for that app.
- Starting on Android 12 (API level 31), apps benefit from a [reduced attack surface](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking). A generic web intent resolves to the user's default browser app unless the target app is approved for the specific domain contained in that web intent.

> All deep links must be enumerated and verified for correct website association. The actions they perform must be well tested, especially all input data which should be deemed to be untrustworthy and thus should be always validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All deep links must be enumerated and verified for correct website association. The actions they perform must be well tested, especially all input data, which should be deemed untrustworthy and thus should always be validated.
```

### Static Analysis

#### Enumerate Deep Links

**Inspecting the Android Manifest:**

You can easily determine whether deep links (with or without custom URL schemes) are defined by [decoding the app using apktool](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#exploring-the-app-package) and inspecting the Android Manifest file looking for [`<intent-filter>` elements](https://developer.android.com/guide/components/intents-filters.html#DataTest "intent-filters - DataTest").

- **Custom Url Schemes**: The following example specifies a deep link with a custom URL scheme called `myapp://`.

  ```xml
  <activity android:name=".MyUriActivity">
    <intent-filter>
        <action android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" />
        <category android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
        <category android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />
        <data android:scheme="myapp" android:host="path" />
    </intent-filter>
  </activity>
  ```

> - **Deep Links**: The following example specifies a deep Link using both the `http://` and `https://` schemes, along with the host and path which will activate it (in this case, the full URL would be `https://www.myapp.com/my/app/path`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Deep Links**: The following example specifies a deep Link using both the `http://` and `https://` schemes, along with the host and path that will activate it (in this case, the full URL would be `https://www.myapp.com/my/app/path`):
```

- **App Links**: If the `<intent-filter>` includes the flag `android:autoVerify="true"`, this causes the Android system to reach out to the declared `android:host` in an attempt to access the [Digital Asset Links file](https://developers.google.com/digital-asset-links/v1/getting-started "Digital Asset Link") in order to [verify the App Links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations "Verify Android App Links"). **A deep link can be considered an App Link only if the verification is successful.**

  ```xml
  <intent-filter android:autoVerify="true">
  ```

When listing deep links remember that `<data>` elements within the same `<intent-filter>` are actually merged together to account for all variations of their combined attributes.

```xml
<intent-filter>
  ...
  <data android:scheme="https" android:host="www.example.com" />
  <data android:scheme="app" android:host="open.my.app" />
</intent-filter>
```

It might seem as though this supports only `https://www.example.com` and `app://open.my.app`. However, it actually supports:

- `https://www.example.com`
- `app://open.my.app`
- `app://www.example.com`
- `https://open.my.app`

**Using Dumpsys:**

> Use [adb](0x08-Testing-Tools.md#adb) to run following command which will show all schemes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [adb](0x08-Testing-Tools.md#adb) to run the following command that will show all schemes:
```

```xml
<application>
  <activity android:name=”MainActivity”>
    <intent-filter android:autoVerify="true">
      <action android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" />
      <category android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
      <category android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />
      <data android:scheme="https" />
      <data android:scheme="https" />
      <data android:host="www.example.com" />
      <data android:host="mobile.example.com" />
    </intent-filter>
  </activity>
</application>
```

In order for the deep links to correctly register, a valid Digital Asset Links file must be published at both `https://www.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json` and `https://mobile.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json`.

**Check for Wildcards:**

If the hostname includes a wildcard (such as `*.example.com`), you should be able to find a valid Digital Asset Links file at the root hostname: `https://example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json`.

#### Check the Handler Method

> Even if the deep link is correctly verified you should carefully analyze the logic of the handler method and pay special attention to **deep links being used to transmit data** (which is controlled externally, e.g. by the user or any other app).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if the deep link is correctly verified, the logic of the handler method should be carefully analyzed. Pay special attention to **deep links being used to transmit data** (which is controlled externally by the user or any other app). 
```

This method of defining deep links via intent filters has an important issue: any other apps installed on a user's device can declare and try to handle the same intent (typically a custom URL scheme). This is known as **deep link collision** where any arbitrary application can declare control over the exact same URL custom scheme belonging to another application. In recent versions of Android this results in a so-called _disambiguation dialog_ being shown to the user and asking them to select the application that should handle the link. The user could make the mistake of choosing a malicious application instead of the legitimate one.

![OWASP_MSTG](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/images/app-disambiguation_2x.png)

> > Something similar happens with Android App Links. Only one app at a time can be associated with a particular domain. If another app is already verified for the domain, the user must first disassociate that other app with the domain before they can associate your app with the domain. Apps are able to [ask the user to assotiate an app with a certain domain](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#request-user-associate-app-with-domain). However, it is not a risk since these links are verified and will only work with the declaring legitimate apps.

Reviewer 2: Why is this in a > ?

> > Something similar happens with Android App Links. Only one app at a time can be associated with a particular domain. If another app is already verified for the domain, the user must first disassociate that other app with the domain before they can associate your app with the domain. Apps are able to [ask the user to assotiate an app with a certain domain](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#request-user-associate-app-with-domain). However, it is not a risk since these links are verified and will only work with the declaring legitimate apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Something similar happens with Android App Links. Only one app at a time can be associated with a particular domain. If another app is already verified for the domain, the user must first disassociate that other app with the domain before they can associate your app with the domain. Apps are able to [ask the user to assotiate an app with a certain domain](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#request-user-associate-app-with-domain). However, it is not a risk since these links are verified and will only work with the declaring legitimate apps.
```

### Static Analysis

#### Check for Non-verifiable Deep Links

On Android 11 (API level 30) and lower, if the app has any [non-verifiable links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#fix-errors), it can cause the system to not verify all Android App Links for that app.

> > Apps on Android 12 (API level 31) benefit from a [reduced attack surface](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking). A generic web intent resolves to the user's default browser app unless the target app is approved for the specific domain contained in that web intent.

Reviewer 2: Why a > ?

> > Apps on Android 12 (API level 31) benefit from a [reduced attack surface](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking). A generic web intent resolves to the user's default browser app unless the target app is approved for the specific domain contained in that web intent.

Author: ```suggestion
Apps on Android 12 (API level 31) benefit from a [reduced attack surface](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking). A generic web intent resolves to the user's default browser app unless the target app is approved for the specific domain contained in that web intent.
```

In this example, the `<intent-filter>` includes the flag `android:autoVerify="true"`, which makes it an App Link and causes the Android system to reach out to the declared `android:host` in an attempt to access the [Digital Asset Links file](https://developers.google.com/digital-asset-links/v1/getting-started "Digital Asset Link") in order to [verify the App Links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations "Verify Android App Links").

> It is an [Android best practice](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#add-intent-filters) to include `autoVerify` to each `<intent-filter>`.  

#### Check for Redirects

> The system doesn't verify any Android App Links for an app if it set a redirect such as "http://example.com to https://example.com" or "example.com to www.example.com".

Author: TODO: add a reference link

> The system doesn't verify any Android App Links for an app if the server sets a redirect such as "http://example.com to https://example.com" or "example.com to www.example.com".

Author: ```suggestion
To enhance the app security, the system [doesn't verify any Android App Links](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#fix-errors) for an app if the server sets a redirect such as "http://example.com to https://example.com" or "example.com to www.example.com".
```

#### Check for Subdomains

> If an intent filter lists multiple hosts with different subdomains, there must be a valid assetlinks.json on each domain. For example, the following intent filter includes www.example.com and mobile.example.com as accepted intent URL hosts. So a valid assetlinks.json must be published at both https://www.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json and https://mobile.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an intent filter lists multiple hosts with different subdomains, there must be a valid assetlinks.json on each domain. For example, the following intent filter includes www.example.com and mobile.example.com as accepted intent URL hosts. In order for the links to correctly register, a valid assetlinks.json must be published at both https://www.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json and https://mobile.example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json.
```

Also note that if the hostname includes a wildcard (such as *.example.com), you should be able to find an assetlinks.json file at the root hostname (https://example.com/.well-known/assetlinks.json).

```xml
<application>
  <activity android:name=”MainActivity”>
    <intent-filter android:autoVerify="true">
      <action android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" />
      <category android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
      <category android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />
      <data android:scheme="https" />
      <data android:scheme="https" />
      <data android:host="www.example.com" />
      <data android:host="mobile.example.com" />
    </intent-filter>
  </activity>
</application>
```

#### Check the Handler Method

You should carefully analyze the logic of the deep link or App Link handler:

> - Check for **String Comparison Methods** being sued such as `startsWith`, `endsWith`, `contains` methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Check for **String Comparison Methods** being used such as `startsWith`, `endsWith`, `contains` methods.
```

- Check for [**Serialization Issues**](#testing-object-persistence-mstg-platform-8).

> - Check for **Data Transmission**

Reviewer 2: That's pretty vague. What do you mean?

Author: "Data Transmission" continues below but I realize now that the flow is not right. I will rework this section a little bit.

        -d "https://www.myapp.com/my/app/path?dataparam=0" com.myapp.android
```

> On Android 12 (API level 31) and higher, you can also [invoke the verification process manually](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#manual-verification) to test the verification logic regardless of whether the app targets Android 12 (API level 31). This is very useful if want to [reset the state of the target app's Android App Links on your device](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#reset-state), [invoke the domain verification process](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#invoke-domain-verification) whenever you like and be able to [review the verification results](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#review-results).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Android 12 (API level 31) and higher, you can also [invoke the verification process manually](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#manual-verification) to test the verification logic regardless of whether the app targets Android 12 (API level 31) or not. This is useful if you want to [reset the state of the target app's Android App Links on your device](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#reset-state), [invoke the domain verification process](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#invoke-domain-verification) and [review the verification results](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations#review-results) in order to debug and troubleshoot.
```
